\input texinfo    @c -*-texinfo-*-
@comment %**start of header (This is for running Texinfo on a region.)
@setfilename cl-ansi-term.info
@settitle cl-ansi-term Library
@set EDITION 0.2
@set VERSION 0.2
@set UPDATED 12 November 2024
@set UPDATED-MONTH November 2024
@set LASTCHANGE November 12 18:42:00 EST 2024

@comment %**end of header (This is for running Texinfo on a region.)
@synindex vr fn

@copying
This manual describes the cl-ansi-term Library (version
@value{VERSION}, @value{UPDATED}), a library which allows to print
various primitives on ANSI-compliant terminals.

Copyright @copyright{} 2015 Mark Karpov, 2020-present Vindarel

@quotation
Permission is granted to copy, distribute and/or modify this document
under the terms of the GNU Free Documentation License, Version 1.3 or
any later version published by the Free Software Foundation; with no
Invariant Sections, no Front-Cover Texts, and no Back-Cover Texts.  A
copy of the license is included in the repository.

@end quotation
@end copying

@dircategory Libraries
@direntry
* cl-ansi-term: (cl-ansi-term).       cl-ansi-term library API.
@end direntry

@titlepage
@title cl-ansi-term Library
@subtitle Edition @value{EDITION}, for @code{cl-ansi-term Library} Version @value{VERSION}.
@subtitle @value{UPDATED-MONTH}
@author Mark Karpov

@page
@vskip 0pt plus 1filll
@insertcopying

@end titlepage

@contents

@ifnottex
@node Top
@top cl-ansi-term Library

This document describes cl-ansi-term library, utility that aids to
print various primitives on ANSI-compliant terminals. This program is
distributed under GNU General Public License, version 3.

All symbols described in this document live in @code{cl-ansi-term}
package, it has the following nicknames: @code{term}.

@menu
* Graphic Rendition:: Creating and using style-sheets.
* Primitives:: Functions and variables to print various primitives.
* Hooks:: How to use hooks to extend or alter behavior of cl-ansi-term.
* Concept Index:: Index of concepts described in this manual.
* Function and Variable Index::	Index of externally visible functions
and variables.
@end menu
@end ifnottex

@node Graphic Rendition
@chapter Graphic Rendition

This chapter describes variables and functions that allow to control
graphic rendition on ANSI-complaint terminals.

@cindex style sheet

cl-ansi-term uses the concept of style sheets for graphic rendition. This
means that the programmer doesn't need to specify all rendition
parameters every time he/she wants to use specific graphical
effects. Instead, the programmer is provided with the tools to define
styles of output, and then use abstract names of the styles to specify
how output should be rendered. This allows to reduce repetition of
rendition parameters in code and avoid associated errors.

Note that cl-ansi-term is able to detect when the output goes to a file
instead of a terminal. In this case, it does not print escape sequences.

@defvar *effects-enabled*
If this variable is bound to non-@code{nil} value, graphic rendition
effects (and other terminal-dependent effects) are enabled, otherwise
they are disabled.
@end defvar

@defun update-style-sheet alist
Update style sheet used by the application. Every item of @var{alist}
must be a list with @code{car} denoting name of style sheet entry and
@code{cdr} representing collection of tokens that define terminal
rendition. Tokens can represent various things: foreground color,
background color, and effects. Every type of token has its default
value, so you can omit some tokens. However, if there are more than
one token of the same type (for example @code{:red} and @code{:green}
-- both tokens represent foreground color), result is unpredictable
and depends on internal workings of Common Lisp implementation
used. You cannot redefine @code{:default} style, it's always represent
default parameters of rendition.
@end defun

Example:

@example
(update-style-sheet
 '((:header :cyan   :underline)
   (:mark   :red    :reverse)
   (:term   :yellow :bold)))
@end example

@cindex foreground colors

Foreground colors are (default value is @code{:default}):
@itemize @bullet
@item
@code{:default}
@item
@code{:black}
@item
@code{:red}
@item
@code{:green}
@item
@code{:yellow}
@item
@code{:blue}
@item
@code{:magenta}
@item
@code{:cyan}
@item
@code{:white*}
@item
@code{:black*}
@item
@code{:red*}
@item
@code{:green*}
@item
@code{:yellow*}
@item
@code{:blue*}
@item
@code{:magenta*}
@item
@code{:cyan*}
@item
@code{:white*}
@end itemize

Colors that are denoted by keywords ending with asterisk are not in
ANSI standard (high intensity variants of 8 basic colors).

@cindex background colors

Background colors are (default value is @code{:b-default}):
@itemize @bullet
@item
@code{:b-default}
@item
@code{:b-black}
@item
@code{:b-red}
@item
@code{:b-green}
@item
@code{:b-yellow}
@item
@code{:b-blue}
@item
@code{:b-magenta}
@item
@code{:b-cyan}
@item
@code{:b-white*}
@item
@code{:b-black*}
@item
@code{:b-red*}
@item
@code{:b-green*}
@item
@code{:b-yellow*}
@item
@code{:b-blue*}
@item
@code{:b-magenta*}
@item
@code{:b-cyan*}
@item
@code{:b-white*}
@end itemize

Colors that are denoted by keywords ending with asterisk are not in
ANSI standard (high intensity variants of 8 basic colors).

@cindex rendition effects

Rendition effects are (default value is @code{:normal}):
@itemize @bullet
@item
@code{:bold} -- bold or increased intensity
@item
@code{:faint} -- decreased intensity (not widely supported)
@item
@code{:italic} -- not widely supported, sometimes treated as inverse
@item
@code{:underline} -- single underline
@item
@code{:blink} -- less than 150 per minute
@item
@code{:bad-blink} -- MS-DOS ANSI.SYS, 150+ per minute, not widely
supported
@item
@code{:inverse} -- swap foreground and background colors, reverse
video
@item
@code{:hide} -- not widely supported
@item
@code{:fraktur} -- hardly ever supported
@item
@code{:normal} -- normal color and intensity
@item
@code{:framed}
@item
@code{:encircled}
@item
@code{:overlined}
@end itemize

@node Primitives
@chapter Primitives

This chapter describes a variable and functions to print various
primitives on ANSI-complaint terminals. All the functions take many
keyword parameters so the programmer has great control over them.

@defvar *terminal-width*
Many functions use this value to output text nicely. Default value is
@code{80}. If you want to dynamically change this value, write and
register @code{:before-printing} hook and reassign terminal width
before printing takes place (@pxref{Hooks}).
@end defvar

@defun cat-print objects @code{&key} base-style margin fill-column align stream
Concatenate @var{objects} and print them. @var{objects} must be a list
designator that consists of printable objects and lists where
@code{car} is a printable object and @code{cadr} is a keyword that
denotes style of the object. Unspecified styles default to
@var{base-style}. @var{margin}, @var{fill-column}, and @var{align}
control corresponding parameters of output. Valid values for
@var{align} are @code{:left} (default), @code{:center}, and
@code{:right}. Output goes to @var{stream}.

Example:
@example
(term:cat-print '(:abc :def :ghi))
ABCDEFGHI
(term:cat-print '(:abc :def :ghi) :align :center)
                                   ABCDEFGHI

@end example
@end defun

@defun print-styled control-string @code{&key} args base-style margin fill-column align stream
Insert arguments from @var{args} (list designator) into
@var{control-string} substituting tildes @code{~}. Any region of text
in @var{control-string} can be printed in specified style following
this pattern:
@code{[}@var{text}@code{](}@var{name-of-style}@code{)}. Where
@var{name-of-style} is downcased name of symbol (keyword) in style
sheet. Style of the rest of the output defaults to
@var{base-style}. @var{margin}, @var{fill-column}, and @var{align}
control corresponding parameters of output. Valid values for
@var{align} are @code{:left} (default), @code{:center}, and
@code{:right}. Output goes to @var{stream}.

Example:
@example
(term:print-styled "~ and ~" :args '("foo" "bar"))
;; "foo and bar"
@end example
@end defun

@defun hr @code{&key} filler style width align stream
Print a horizontal line. Characters in the line are created by
repeating given @var{filler} until @var{width} characters
accumulated. If @var{width} is not a positive number,
@var{*terminal-width*} will be added to it to get positive
@var{width}. @var{style} controls graphic rendition. @var{align}
should be a keyword: @code{:left}, @code{:right}, or
@code{:center}. Output goes to @var{stream}.

Example:
@example
(term:hr :filler "=")
================================================================================
@end example
@end defun

@defun progress-bar label progress @code{&key} margin label-style filler bar-style num-style bar-width stream
Print a progress bar. If @var{progress} is less than @code{100}, move
cursor to the beginning of current line, so next invocation of
@code{progress-bar} will rewrite it. This function doesn't print
anything if @var{progress} is less than @code{100} and output stream
is not interactive or @var{*effects-enabled*} is @code{nil}. Insert
@var{margin} spaces, then @var{label} (style for the label is set with
@var{label-style}). Size of progress bar is set by @var{bar-width}. If
@var{bar-width} is not a positive number, @var{*terminal-width*} will
be added to it to get positive @var{bar-width}. @var{bar-style} is the
style that will be used for the bar itself, while @var{num-style} will
be used for number of percents and some additional elements. Output
goes to @var{stream}.
@end defun

@defun u-list tree @code{&key} bullet mark-suffix bullet-style item-style mark-style margin level-margin fill-column stream
Print an unordered list according to @var{tree}. If we consider
@var{tree} a list, every element must be either a printable object to
print as a list item or a list where @code{car} is the list item and
@code{cdr} is sublist of the item. @var{bullet} must be a string
designator, it will be converted to string if needed and its
characters will be used as bullets: zeroth character will be the
bullet for top level of the list, first character is the bullet for
sublist, etc. If there are more levels of nesting than characters in
the string, it will be cycled. @var{bullet-style} is used for
bullets. It can be also a list, in this case it's possible to specify
different styles for different levels of nesting. @var{item-style} is
used to render the list items. @var{mark-style} is used for items that
end with @var{mark-suffix} (it can be any printable
object). @var{level-margin} must be a positive integer that specifies
how to increase margin for every level of nesting, you can also use
plain @var{margin}. @var{fill-column} is used to split long items, if
it's not a positive number, @var{*terminal-width*} will be added to it
to get positive @var{fill-column}. Output goes to @var{stream}.

Example:

@example
(term:u-list '((:one one-a :one-b) :two))
* ONE
  - ONE-A
  - ONE-B
* TWO
@end example

@end defun

@defun o-list tree @code{&key} index delimiter mark-suffix index-style item-style mark-style margin level-margin fill-column stream
Print ordered list according to @var{tree}. If we consider @var{tree}
a list, every element must be either a printable object to print as a
list item or a list where @code{car} is list item and @code{cdr} is
sublist of the item. @code{index} must be a list designator, its
elements should be keywords that denote how to represent
numeration. Acceptable values are:
@itemize @bullet
@item
@code{:arabic} -- indexes will be printed as arabic numerals (default
value);
@item
@code{:roman} -- indexes will be printed as roman numerals;
@item
@code{:letter} -- indexes will be printed as letters of Latin
alphabet;
@item
@code{:capital} -- the same as @code{:letter}, but capital letters are
used.
@end itemize
If there are more levels of nesting than elements in the list, it will
be cycled. The same applies to @var{delimiter}, which must be a string
designator. @var{index-style} is used for indexes. It can be also
list, in this case it's possible to specify different styles for
different levels of nesting. @var{item-style} is used to render the
list items. @var{mark-style} is used for items that end with
@var{mark-suffix} (it can be any printable object). @var{level-margin}
must be a positive integer that specifies how to increase margin for
every level of nesting, you can also use plain
@var{margin}. @var{fill-column} is used to split long items, if it's
not a positive number, @var{*terminal-output*} will be added to it to
get positive @var{fill-column}. Output goes to @var{stream}.

Example:

@example
(term:o-list '((:one one-a :one-b) :two))
1. ONE
   1. ONE-A
   2. ONE-B
2. TWO
@end example

@end defun

@defun table objects @code{&key} mark-suffix border-chars border-style header-style cell-style mark-style col-header margin column-width align stream
Print a table filling cells with @var{objects}. @var{objects} must be
a list of list designators with equal lengths. If @var{border-style}
is @code{nil}, no border will be printed, otherwise @var{border-style}
is expected to be a keyword that denotes style in which borders of the
table should be printed. @var{header-style} will be applied to the
first row of the table (also to the first column if @var{col-header}
is not @code{nil}) and @var{cell-style} will be applied to all other
rows. If @var{cell-style} is a list, its elements will be used to
differently render every column. Objects that end with
@var{mark-suffix} will be printed using
@var{mark-style}. @var{margin}, @var{column-width} (list designator,
may be used to set different width for every column), and @var{align}
can also be specified. Valid values of @var{align} are: @code{:left}
(default value), @code{:center}, and @code{:right}. Output goes to
@var{stream}.

Example:
@example
(term:table (list '("name" "age")
                  '("me" "7")))
+---------+---------+
|name     |age      |
+---------+---------+
|me       |7        |
+---------+---------+
@end example
@end defun

@node Hooks
@chapter Hooks

@cindex hooks

This chapter describes functions that allow to register custom hooks
that will be invoked on specific predefined events.

@defun register-hook event function
Register a hook. When predefined @var{event} occurs @var{function}
will be called. You can register many functions to call on the same
event. Acceptable values of @var{event}:
@itemize @bullet
@item
@code{:before-printing} -- @var{function} is invoked just before
printing takes place, no argument is passed to the function.
@item
@code{:after-printing} -- @var{function} is invoked after printing, no
argument is passed to the function.
@item
@code{:on-style-change} -- @var{function} is invoked before style
changing escape sequence is printed. One argument is passed to
@var{function}, name of the style, which is a keyword.
@end itemize
@end defun

@defun remove-hook event
Remove all registered functions that are called on
@var{event}. Returns @code{t} if there were any functions associated
with @var{event} and @code{nil} otherwise.
@end defun

@node Concept Index
@unnumbered Concept Index
@printindex cp

@node Function and Variable Index
@unnumbered Function and Variable Index
@printindex fn

@bye
